1. What role does empathy play in your life and how has it helped you?

  Empathy is one of the most important features in my life. I have a wide network of people who I am lucky enough to call my friends, colleagues, and family. Having held a multitude of different positions in many industries, the main similar factor across all of my life has been the relationships I have built. I am constantly in touch with folks from throughout my life, and we are able to support each other due to our understandings of the situations and circumstances we are in.

2. How does empathy help you build better software?

  In the same vein as ^, empathy is, I believe, the most important attribute of effective communication. Software is explicitly designed to have a purpose, and most often that is to help people. Empathy is the framework through which every skill, communication, or requirement is funneled. Similar to how the design of beautiful homes is centered around light - the design of good communication and teamwork is centered around empathy.

3. Why is empathy important for working on a team?

  Without empathy, communication breaks down. When communication is not operating optimally, work is slower and less pleasant. Across the academic side of Child Development, for many years the field was dominated by a series of moral stages crafted by Erikson. The moral stages attempted to explain how people make decisions, and how those decisions are cultivated by a world view, and how that world view changes as people ascend through the stages of morality (This is inaccurate in it's brevity, but the point to come remains...). The academic field was rooted in this theory of an all encompassing third person perspective on a moral compass. However, it was not until Carol Gilligan began her work on a theory of "Care Ethics" that the literature shifted, and the field gradually accepted that a moral hierarchy of stages fails to include individual's relational approach to decisions affecting others. In brief - empathy is the guiding factor in decision making, and teams, like everything else, must be able to make decisions together for the good of the members. Teams therefore must be able to empathize within in order to make good decisions.

5. Describe a situation in which your ability to empathize with a colleague or teammate was helpful.

  While I was working at a Circus Camp many years ago, the hours were very long and demanding. Working at a camp is not easy, and adding in instruction on often dangerous skills does not ease the stress levels that normal camp problems have on counselors and coaches. One summer, we had moved to a brand new location, and nothing was quite right with it. There was a lot of space, but none of it was what we were used to. Nothing had been properly setup, so everything took twice as long, which led to everybody feeling overworked. We did not have time for fun. In order to fix the feelings we were all feeling, we had to spend time constructively, but we did not have the time to spend. In this circumstance, the only thing that brought us all close together and back into being on top of everything was our ability to cover for each other. As an example - although I was overworked most of the time, I could see sometimes when I had brief downtime that a colleague was really hurting. Instead of taking my time off, I would help them out with their responsibilities. The also then paid that forward, and slowly as a cohesive group, our care started to turn around the insurmountable efforts of lack of time.

6. When do you find it most difficult to be empathetic in professional settings? How can you improve your skills when faced with these scenarios?

  I find it hardest to be empathetic in situations where leadership is suffering. Without direction, it can be very hard to recenter and assess how everyone is doing/communicating. I can improve my skills in situations where that happens by being more proactive about good methods of communication, as well as by understanding the work that other people are doing more. By focusing too much on my own work, I can lose track of how everything fits together.
